# mkrootfs.8.pod - mkrootfs(8) manual page
# See COPYING and COPYRIGHT files for corresponding information.

=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

mkrootfs - make root filesystem for chroot installation

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<mkrootfs> [I<OPTION>]... [I<PKGNAME>]...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<mkrootfs> builds customized root filesystem for chroot installation.
By default, B<mkrootfs> builds and installs all packages from C<core>
pkgsrc collection, unless I<PKGNAME>(s) specified.

=head1 OPTIONS

Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.

=over

=item B<-B>

Prepare rootfs directory.

=item B<-C>

Check rootfs directory for missing libraries.

=item B<-T>

Compress rootfs directory (prepare tarball).

=item B<-c>, B<--config>=I<FILE>

Specify an alternate configuration file.

Default: F</etc/mkrootfs/config>.

=item B<-l>, B<--log>=I<FILE>

Specify an alternate log file for L<pkgman(1)> invocations.

Default: /tmp/rootfs-C<DATE>-C<ARCH>.log

=item B<-r>, B<--rootfs>=I<PATH>

Specify an alternate rootfs directory.

Default: /tmp/rootfs-C<DATE>-C<ARCH>/

=item B<-t>, B<--tar>=I<FILE>

Specify an alternate compressed rootfs tarball.

Default: /tmp/rootfs-C<DATE>-C<ARCH>.tar.xz

=item B<-x>, B<--pkgmk-config>=I<FILE>

Specify an alternate configuration file for L<pkgmk(8)> invocations.

Default: F</etc/pkgmk.conf>.

=item B<-y>, B<--pkgman-config>=I<FILE>

Specify an alternate configuration file for L<pkgman(1)> invocations.

Default: F</etc/pkgman.conf>.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 8

=item F</etc/mkrootfs/config>

Global B<mkrootfs>' configuration.  See L<mkrootfs.config(5)> for more
information.

=item F</etc/pkgmk.conf>

Configuration file for invoked pkgmk.

=item F</etc/pkgman.conf>

Configuration file for invoked pkgman.

=back

=head1 EXIT STATUS

=over 8

=item C<0>

Success.

=item C<1>

Generic error code.

=item C<2>

Building rootfs directory failed.

=item C<3>

Checking rootfs directory for missing libraries failed.

=item C<4>

Compressing rootfs directory (preparing the tarball) failed.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<mkrootfs.config(5)>, L<mkrootfs.release(7)>

=cut

# vim: sw=2 ts=2 sts=2 et tw=71 cc=72
# End of file.
